---
layout: post
title: Google App Engine tags for ndb
description: >
  A way to add tags to ndb models via a mixin
modified: 2014-04-04 9:29:00
category: articles
tags:
  - python
  - google app engine
  - python
image:
  feature: so-simple-sample-image-3.jpg
  credit: Michael Rose
  creditlink: http://mademistakes.com
comments: true
share: true
---

# What is it?

This is a way to add tags to Google App Engine models.


# Why is it important?

Adding tags to data models is a popular phenomenon, but there does not appear to be a published way to accomplish this with `ndb`. This method is a reusable and performant solution.


# How does it work?

Get [the full gist is gist.github.com](https://gist.github.com/brianmhunt/9974822).

This concept has two `ndb.Model` derivates, the `Tag` and the `TagMixin`.


## Design

The requirements here for me were as follows:

1. The tags be stored with the model (i.e. can be accessed without "joins")
2. The `Tag` instances be updated automatically when a model is updated
3. The updates apply only on changed `Tag` instances
4. The update be in parallel

I chose to store tags as strings and generate a unique key from that string. The corresponding `Tag` instances are updated in parallel by `tasklets` called
from `ndb` model hooks.


## The `Tag`

This `Tag` class that keeps track of the popularity (`count`) of a
tag and linked items.

{% highlight python %}
from google.appengine.ext import ndb

MAX_TAGS_FOR_TAGGABLE = 1000
POPULAR_PAGE_SIZE = 30


class Tag(ndb.Model):
    """A tag is a string.
    """
    tag = ndb.StringProperty(required=True, indexed=True)
    count = ndb.IntegerProperty(default=0, indexed=True)
    linked = ndb.KeyProperty(repeated=True)
    created = ndb.DateTimeProperty(auto_now_add=True)
    modified = ndb.DateTimeProperty(auto_now=True)

    @staticmethod
    def tag_to_keyname(tag):
        return "tag__{}".format(tag)

    @staticmethod
    def tag_to_key(tag):
        return ndb.Key("Tag", Tag.tag_to_keyname(tag))

    @classmethod
    def get_linked_by_tag(self, tag, limit=MAX_TAGS_FOR_TAGGABLE):
        """Return the set of keys for this name"""
        try:
            return Tag.tag_to_key(tag).get().linked
        except AttributeError:
            return []

    @classmethod
    def get_or_create_async(cls, tag):
        """Return a future for a Tag instance for the given tag
        """
        return Tag.get_or_insert_async(Tag.tag_to_keyname(tag), tag=tag)

    @classmethod
    def get_popular_query(cls, page_size=POPULAR_PAGE_SIZE):
        return Tag.query().order(-Tag.count)

    def unlink_async(self, key):
        """Delete all tags for the given key; returns a list of futures"""
        self.linked.remove(key)
        self.count -= 1
        return self.put_async()

    def link_async(self, key):
        """Add the given tags for the key; returns a list of futures"""
        self.linked.append(key)
        self.count += 1
        return self.put_async()
{% endhighlight %}


## The `TagMixin`

The mixin that one would use to add tags to models is as follows:

{% highlight python %}
class TagMixin(object):
    """A mixin that adds taggability to a class.

    Adds a 'tags' property.
    """
    tags = ndb.StringProperty(repeated=True, indexed=True)

    def _post_get_hook(self, future):
        """Set the _tm_tags so we can compare for changes in pre_put
        """
        self._tm_tags = future.get_result().tags

    def _post_put_hook(self, future):
        """Modify the associated Tag instances to reflect any updates
        """
        old_tagset = set(getattr(self, '_tm_tags', []))
        new_tagset = set(self.tags)

        # These are tags that have changed
        added_tags = new_tagset - old_tagset
        deleted_tags = old_tagset - new_tagset

        # Get the key for this post
        self_key = future.get_result()

        @ndb.tasklet
        def update_changed(tag):
            tag_instance = yield Tag.get_or_create_async(tag)
            if tag in added_tags:
                yield tag_instance.link_async(self_key)
            else:
                yield tag_instance.unlink_async(self_key)

        ndb.Future.wait_all([
            update_changed(tag) for tag in added_tags | deleted_tags
        ])

        # Update for any successive puts on this model.
        self._tm_tags = self.tags
{% endhighlight %}


## Usage

Given a model with the mixin like this:

{% highlight python %}
>>> class TagModel(TagMixin, ndb.Model):
...    name = ndb.StringProperty()  # just an arbitrary property

# And an instance, for illustration
>>> tm = TagModel()

# Getting and setting tags is done as normal
# for a property of an `ndb.Model`:
>>> TagModel(tags=["new"])
>>> tm.tags = ["hot", "plasma"]
>>> tm.put()
>>> len(tm.tags)
3

# How many tags are there?
>>> Tag.query().count()
3

# Get the `ndb.Key` instances for models for a given tag:
>>> Tag.get_linked_by_tag("plasma")
ndb.Key('TagModel', 0)

# Query the tags by popularity (in this case they are all used only once):
>>> popular_tags = Tag.get_popular_query().fetch(3)

# Convert t list of `Tag` instances to strings with e.g.
>>> [t.tag for t in Tag.popular_tags]
['new', 'hot', 'plasma']
{% endhighlight %}


It is straightforward to add for example getting recently updated or old tags
with: `Tag.query().order(-Tag.modified)`

The unit tests in [the associated gist](https://gist.github.com/brianmhunt/9974822) illustrate usage and expectations in better detail.

***Careful*** Be mindful that the mixin uses the hooks `_post_get_hook` and
`_post_put_hook`. If your models also use these you will need a way to call them
e.g. calling from your hooks the respective
 `self.__bases__[0]._post_{get,put}_hook`, where `0` corresponds to the index
 of `TagMixin` in the `__bases__`.

# License

Code herein is licensed under the [MIT <http://brianmhunt.mit-license.org/>](http://brianmhunt.mit-license.org/) license.


# See also

- [gae-taggable-mixin for db.Model](https://github.com/bubenkoff/gae-taggable-mixin)
